This video we'll learn about static class members and how to use them in C++.
In a C++ class we can have both static data and function members when we declare class data members
is static.
We're telling the C++ compiler that these data members belong to the class not to any specific object.
So they're extremely useful to create class wide information.
For example suppose we wanted to know how many player objects we have active in our application at any
point in time.
We could create a global variable and then incremented decremented in the code whenever we create an
object or delete an object.
This is really hard to do though since we really can't be sure when constructors are called and when
destructors are being called.
So a better solution is to create a static variable.
That's part of the player class.
And then we can manipulate that variable directly within the player class and then whenever we need
to know how many player objects there are we can simply ask the player class.
We don't even need any objects.
In fact if the player count is zero.
This means that there are no active player objects at all.
So how could we modify our player class to support this.
Let's start with the player class will create a player that h file with the class specification in a
player's GPP file with the class definition.
Now we need to add a static data member to the class.
We can do this very easily by adding a private static int named non-players will initialize this to
zero a little bit later since we can't initialize it right here.
We also would need to declare a static class function that returns an integer.
It will return the static integer We just declared.
And you can see that at the bottom it is called Get non-players.
Now let's head over to Player C P P This is where we want to initialize the static integer non-players
to 0.
Notice that the syntax might look a little strange.
This is where you define that variable and assign it to zero in this case dismiss happened exactly once
and it typically happens in the data file for the class.
Finally we implement the static function get non-players.
Since this function is static it only has access to static data members.
It does not have access to non-static class data members.
So in this function we simply return non-players.
Pretty easy.
There's only one part left to do.
We need to increment and decrement the number of players whenever we create and destroy objects.
The best place to increment the player count is in the constructor.
In this case we simply increment non-players by 1.
Be careful though if you have many overloaded constructors.
Since you might have to increment non-players in more than one place.
Basically anywhere you create an object will only have one constructor in the player class.
And we're delegating to it from our copy constructor.
So this is the only place we want to increment non-players in this example our original player class
didn't have a destructor.
It used the compiler provided default destructor since it was all we needed.
However now we need to define our own destructor and decrement the number of players count when the
object is destroyed.
That's it.
We're all set.
Now we can use our player class and simply call player getting some players and it will return the number
of active player objects.
I created a simple helper function named display active players and any time I need to display the number
of active players I simply call it.
Now look at the main.
The first statement is display active players and it will display 0 as we add and remove player objects
will display active players and it will display the current number of active player objects.
Let's head over to the IDM will take the existing player class through the process of providing this
behavior.
OK so the idea and I'm in the section 13 workspace in the static class members project and what I've
done is I've created the basic player class and you can see here I've got three files players on H played
on CBP and maned CBP and right now we're looking at player daat H you can see we've got our include
guard here were included stream because we're using strings inside the player class and it's a basic
player class that we've been using all along.
It's got the string name the integer healthy integer XP and we've got a getter here and some constructor
that uses default parameters a copy constructor and a structure that does nothing right now.
And the C.P. file implements the constructor the copy constructor and it's got a an empty destructor
right now.
So what we want to do is we want to go to the player that h file and what we want to do as I said in
the previous slides is to know how many players are active at any time so we need a counter type variable
we could add that to objects because then each object would have their own copy.
So we want to use static variable at the class level so that we now have a variable that applies to
the inclined class.
So we'll define that right here we'll make it private.
And once you say static and then we'll call it non-players.
Simple as that.
Now you think that you could initialize it right here.
But if you try that and try to compile it or get a compiler error that says that C++ forbids in class
initialization of nonconstant members and you can't do that.
So we'll get rid of that and initialize it in a second.
In the cpp file.
So that's my static variable that member and now this does not belong to any object.
This belongs to the class and then we need to implement a static class function and we'll do that down
here and we'll just call it static.
It's going to return an int and it's going to be called Get non-players.
Simple as that.
Now one thing to remember because this function is static.
It only has access to static variables.
That makes sense.
It doesn't have access to any object variables any of these guys name Health Expwy those belong to specific
objects static only belongs to the class.
This is a class function and it only has access to that static non-players.
In this example we could have a lot of other static functions if we like but we they need the one in
this example.
So that takes care of the header file save that you now we'll go over to the TPP file.
Now this first thing we want to do is we want to initialize that static variable here.
And the syntax looks something like this.
It the class name and the name of the variable name players.
And here we can initialize it to zero.
And now you can see that if I compile and run now I get a clean run from that.
So that's initialize it only happens once.
And the best place to do that is in the CTP file for the class that you're defining.
OK.
And then the last thing we'll do is well not the last thing but do the next thing we'll do is we'll
implement the end player get non-players function and it's we do that again.
Get non-players it's that function right here and we're going to implement that function so that it
returns the number of players it has access to that it's a static variable.
And that's really all we care about.
Now remember we already defined that as a static method right here in player can see it's right here.
So we don't have to say static again down here.
That's it.
Now what do we need to do.
Well we need to increment and decrement the number of players depending on when we construct or destruct
things.
So this is the only constructor I have even when we've got a copy constructor that we create a copy
of an object.
We're still delegated to a player.
So right here I want to increment the number of players.
And in the destructor I want to decrement the number of players so that will take care of the semantics
that I want.
So at that point this class is done and we can now head over to the main class and test some of this.
So the first thing we do in the main classes we're right a real simple function and we'll just keep
calling that function and wherever we want to display active players it would just save us a lot of
typing.
So we'll call it void display.
Active players
doesn't expect anything and all we're going to do in here is we're just going to do an output statement
and we'll say something like active players colon.
And so now how do I know how many active players there are I don't have any objects to call.
That's the whole point.
I can simply say player and we need a scope resolution operator and then we can call the static method
get non-players right here.
That's going to return the integer that represents that static data member that we had in the class
and we'll just supply an inline here.
OK so now let's go to Maine and let's call that method which is called display active players.
All right.
We'll put a breakpoint in here so that we can walk through this.
And let's run this and we have an error display active players who can't find it players.
I spelled it wrong and Essop here and now we should be good to go.
So let's step through it through the debugger and move this output window here over to the right again.
And so what would we expect here.
Well we're going to call display active players and display active players is simply going to be asked
the player class to get the number of players at this point.
We have none.
There's no way we could have done this if we had an object right.
Because there are no objects.
So in this case we're calling player and asking the player class to give us the number of players and
we expect this to display zero when we walk through it.
We get active players zero.
Just exactly what we expect.
Now let's create an object and let's create a player and we'll just call it Hero and we'll give it the
name here and we'll default everything else and then we'll call display active players again.
So at this point we have one active player so let's debug this we'll step through it again.
And right now again we're displaying active players.
We're going to get back to zero.
I'm going to create my player object.
It exists.
You can see it right here.
So we expect that we've got the number players is one and if you look right here then you are a local
variables pain.
You can see that we've got that non-players static variable right here and we have access to it here
so it's nice because you can actually see it.
So at this point we run it.
We get back to the one which is exactly what we expect since we do have one object.
OK so let's let's do another example here.
Let's create a local block here and we'll create another player and we'll call that player Frank.
And again we defaulted to Frank
and then will display active players right in here.
Nimble will display it again when we leave the block.
Now what we expect to happen here is we expect that this Frank object will be created in his local block
will display.
Now we will have to Optix right will display two objects.
Then it's going to go out of scope and be destroyed.
So when we get back to here I tend to display one less again.
So let's do that one more time.
We'll run through the debugger it will step through this one line at a time.
Here we go display active players we expect they'll expand this year we expect it to display zero which
it does.
I just created the hero and I want to display the active players.
I have one now I'm here I'm creating Frank and I'm displaying active players.
I've got two and obviously I can refresh over here and I can see in both places that I've got two players
that's that static data member right there.
Now we expect Frank to go out of scope so the destructor will be called right.
Just got called.
So if we refresh now we've got to zero and we're back down to 1 and we display back down to 1 eventually
will destroy hero again as well and we'll get down to zero.
Let's do just one more little piece of code here and what we'll do is we'll do it right here at the
bottom.
Again we'll say player will create an enemy which is a pointer to a player that will create a new enemy
and we'll just call him enemy and make them pretty strong.
OK.
And right now what we'll do is we'll display active players
and then we'll delete enemy and it will display the active players one more time.
OK.
So let's walk through this one last time
and you can see how useful using the static data members is some displaying active players.
I get back at 0 I create player display to players again I get back to 1 which is what I expect I create.
Frank So that gives me two objects and when I display them I get the two.
Frank just got destroyed.
So I'm going to display one again.
Now here I'm going to create that enemy object on the heap since it's a dynamic allocation and I display
active.
I've got to again I'm going to delete enemy back down to 1.
And at this point the hero will be the leader not back to zero.
OK so there you go there's a simple example that's using the multiple files here to declare some static
data members a static class function.
And we've got a pretty useful little technique that's used a lot.
Sometimes you really need to know how many of your objects are out there and this is really easy way
to do it.